Introduction
Elections for the AAAI Executive Council take place an-
nually, with one-third of the positions being up for elec-
tion each time. Artiﬁcial Intelligence research encompasses
a broad variety of topics, and it is important that the council
has representatives from all major subﬁelds. Moreover, the
community is very international, and the council should rep-
resent the interests of members around the world, so there
is a desire for proportionate representation in terms of geo-
graphical regions. Diversity in terms of gender and academic
seniority is another key desideratum.

There are several multiwinner voting rules that provide
fair representation guarantees (Aziz et al. 2017; Peters and
Skowron 2020). However, existing notions of fairness for
multiwinner voting do not fully capture the complexity of
our setting: it may be the case that a voter is not represented
by any of the candidates elected in the current round, yet
she is satisﬁed with the overall composition of the coun-
cil because she is well-represented by some of the council

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

members elected in the previous rounds. Also, given that the
council is renewed regularly, perhaps a group of voters that
is too small to be assured permanent representation on the
council can be guaranteed a spot every few rounds?

In a somewhat different spirit, consider proof-of-stake
blockchain protocols where a primary concern is the “rich
gets richer effect” (Fanti et al. 2019; Huang et al. 2021). In
such scenarios, lotteries for a single-shot interaction provide
a form of fairness, as the probability of winning is propor-
tional to the invested effort (Orda and Rottenstreich 2019;
Pan et al. 2022). However, such mechanisms may fail to
maintain fairness over time when lotteries are held repeat-
edly over multiple rounds (Fanti et al. 2019; Grossi 2022).
Formalizing fairness concepts and successfully designing
mechanisms for achieving these in the repeated-interaction
setting is therefore highly relevant to blockchain systems.

There are further examples of real-world elections where
temporal considerations play an important role, and many
authors explored multiwinner voting with temporal ele-
ments. However, this body of work does not yet offer a
systematic exploration of issues associated with voting over
time, with each strand of research considering a slightly dif-
ferent model and a different set of applications. Against this
background, we propose a uniﬁed framework to facilitate a
principled study of temporal fairness in multiwinner voting,
highlighting several key challenges, consolidating existing
bodies of work, and identifying gaps in the existing litera-
ture. We aim to set the groundwork for a more coherent, tar-
geted approach to tackling conceptual and algorithmic chal-
lenges in temporal multiwinner voting.

Several elements of our framework originate from a larger
body of work within the social choice literature and be-
yond. This includes, in particular, works on perpetual vot-
ing (Lackner 2020; Lackner and Maly 2023)—and, more
broadly, perpetual participatory budgeting (Lackner, Maly,
and Rey 2021)— which consider multiple rounds of single-
winner voting. Lackner (2020) and Lackner and Maly
(2023) conduct an axiomatic analysis of perpetual voting
rules (temporal extensions of traditional voting rules) with
respect to fairness across time. Relatedly, Harrenstein, Lack-
ner, and Lackner (2022) argue that several common sequen-
tial election mechanisms may be detrimental to welfare. An-
other relevant strand of work is that on conference schedul-
ing (Patro et al. 2022), slot assignment (Elkind, Kraiczy,

 
 
 
 
 
 
and Teh 2022), and line-up elections (Boehmer et al. 2020),
where the goal is to output a sequence of non-repeating win-
ners, whilst maintaining fairness to voters across the entire
time horizon. Sequential committee election models con-
sider settings where an entire committee is elected in each
round, and impose constraints on the extent a committee can
change, whilst ensuring candidates continue to have support
from the electorate (Bredereck, Kaczmarczyk, and Nieder-
meier 2020; Bredereck, Fluschnik, and Kaczmarczyk 2022;
Deltl, Fluschnik, and Bredereck 2023). Other models in the
social choice literature that include temporal elements in-
clude sequential decision-making (Chandak, Goel, and Pe-
ters 2023; Kahana and Hazon 2023), public decision-making
(Brandt et al. 2016; Conitzer, Freeman, and Shah 2017; Fain,
Munagala, and Shah 2018; Skowron and G´orecki 2022;
Lackner, Maly, and Nardi 2023), repeated matching (Gol-
lapudi, Kollias, and Plaut 2020; Trabelsi et al. 2023; Cara-
giannis and Narang 2023), resource allocation over time
(Bampis, Escofﬁer, and Mladenovic 2018; Igarashi et al.
2023), online committee selection (Do et al. 2022), dynamic
social choice (Parkes and Procaccia 2013; Freeman, Za-
hedi, and Conitzer 2017), and temporal liquid democracy
(Markakis and Papasotiropoulos 2023).

As illustrated by the many examples mentioned above,
maintaining welfare and fairness guarantees over time is rel-
evant to many domains. Research into temporal multiwinner
elections would thus allow us to capture many practical sce-
narios, discover notions of representation that are appropri-
ate for temporal settings, and offer insights into the possibil-
ity of achieving desirable goals by society in a computation-
ally efﬁcient manner.

The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. First,
we introduce the framework. We then proceed to look at
each element of the model, ﬂeshing out various options
available, consolidating existing work and positioning it
with regard to these options, and pointing out gaps or ideas
for expansion. Finally, to set the foundations for further
study, we formulate several research challenges and poten-
tial directions to push this ﬁeld forward, and highlight the
immense potential of research in this area.

The Temporal Multiwinner Voting Framework

The basic components of our framework are a set N =
{1, . . . , n} of n agents, a set P = {p1, . . . , pm} of m dis-
tinct projects, or candidates, and a set [ℓ] = {1, . . . , ℓ} of
ℓ timesteps. For each timestep r ∈ [ℓ], each agent i ∈ N
has a preference si,r. This can come in various forms (see
the Preferences section for a discussion). We write si =
(si,1, si,2, . . . , si,ℓ) and refer to si as i’s temporal prefer-
ence. The goal is to select an outcome o = (o1, . . . , oℓ),
which is a sequence of ℓ sets of candidates such that for
every r ∈ [ℓ], the set of candidates or ⊆ P is chosen at
timestep r.

Next, we discuss various elements of the framework, con-
trasting several options within each element, and positioning
the existing work in the computational social choice litera-
ture with respect to these options. We also outline several
directions for future work.

Outcomes
The ﬁrst parameter we explore is what is considered a per-
missible outcome at each timestep. In particular, we distin-
guish between selecting one candidate at a time and choos-
ing multiple candidates at each timestep. We also consider
constraints that can be imposed on the outcome vector.

Structure
In a single-shot multiwinner election, the outcome is a sin-
gle set of candidates. There are two possible generalizations
to the temporal setting. The ﬁrst (and one that is more com-
mon in the literature) is having a single winning candidate
chosen at each timestep (i.e., or ∈ P for each r ∈ [ℓ]).
While one can view this variant of the model as a tempo-
ral extension of single-winner elections, the multiwinner in-
terpretation is justiﬁed, too, as one can treat the (multi-)set
O = {or : r ∈ [ℓ]} as the winning committee and apply
fairness concepts that originate in multiwinner voting litera-
ture to the entire set O; e.g., Bulteau et al. (2021) and Page,
Shapiro, and Talmon (2022) reason about justiﬁed represen-
tation provided by O. This model is considered in numer-
ous existing works, including scheduling problems (Elkind,
Kraiczy, and Teh 2022; Patro et al. 2022), the perpetual vot-
ing model (Lackner 2020; Lackner and Maly 2023), and in
public decision-making (Conitzer, Freeman, and Shah 2017;
Fain, Munagala, and Shah 2018). The second model as-
sumes that the goal is to select a ﬁxed-size set of winning
candidates (i.e., an entire committee) at each timestep. This
approach is taken, e.g., by Bredereck, Kaczmarczyk, and
Niedermeier (2020), Bredereck, Fluschnik, and Kaczmar-
czyk (2022), and Deltl, Fluschnik, and Bredereck (2023) in
their study of sequential committee elections.

Feasibility Constraints
In the standard multiwinner voting setting, it is typically as-
sumed that there is a parameter k such that every subset of
P of size k is a feasible outcome (we note, however, that
there is also work on single-shot multiwinner voting with
constraints on feasible committees (Yang and Wang 2018)).
However, in temporal settings it may be the case that at each
timestep r only a subset of candidates Pr ⊆ P is available,
and the winning candidate(s) have to be chosen from this
set. The simplest variant of this model is where the set Pr is
given in advance and is independent of committees selected
at steps r′ with r′ 6= r. This model is relevant if changes in
Pr are caused by external constraints in candidate availabil-
ity (i.e., perhaps candidate X does not want to run for the
AAAI executive council this year due to heavy administra-
tive load in their department, but will be happy to serve in the
future). In the context of public decision-making (Conitzer,
Freeman, and Shah 2017; Fain, Munagala, and Shah 2018;
Skowron and G´orecki 2022), such constraints can be inﬂu-
enced by the suitability of a project being implemented at
a particular timestep due to manpower or geographical con-
straints (Lodi et al. 2022).

However, it may also be the case that a decision at
timestep r constrains the options available at timestep r′:
e.g., in fair scheduling problems it is common to assume

that each project in P can be implemented at most once, so
if we select p ∈ P at timestep r, it is no longer available at
r′
6= r (Elkind, Kraiczy, and Teh 2022; Patro et al. 2022).
More generally, for each project p ∈ P there may be a bound
αp ∈ N, indicating the maximum number of times that p can
be selected. One can also consider more sophisticated con-
straints, where at most (at least) a certain fraction of the win-
ning committee needs to be replaced at each timestep; this
approach is taken by Bredereck, Kaczmarczyk, and Nieder-
meier (2020) and Bredereck, Fluschnik, and Kaczmarczyk
(2022). There are other constraints of this form that can be
found in practice, but, to the best of our knowledge, have
not been modeled in the literature: e.g., an AAAI executive
council member, once elected, remains a member of the win-
ning committee for three timesteps, but is then not eligible to
participate in the next election (but can run again later on).

Preferences
Another important component of our framework is agents’
preferences. The aspects that need to be considered include
ballot types (e.g., approval, ranked, or cardinal), and if pref-
erences can evolve over time (static or dynamic).

Ballot Types
The computational social choice literature typically fo-
cuses on three ballot types: approval ballots (Aziz et al.
2015; Lackner and Skowron 2023), ranked ballots (Fal-
iszewski et al. 2017; Elkind et al. 2017), and cardinal bal-
lots (Conitzer, Freeman, and Shah 2017; Freeman, Zahedi,
and Conitzer 2017; Fain, Munagala, and Shah 2018).

Approval ballots Much of the recent work on proportion-
ality in computational social choice focuses on approval
ballots (Lackner and Skowron 2023): each agent reports
which candidates they like and dislike. Approval prefer-
ences are relatively easy to elicit and reason about (Kil-
gour 1983; Brams and Fishburn 2005; Aragones, Gilboa,
and Weiss 2011), yet they can capture a wide variety of
scenarios from city budget planning to elections for board
of trustees. In temporal settings, approval ballots have been
considered in the context of sequential committee elections
(Bredereck, Kaczmarczyk, and Niedermeier 2020; Bred-
ereck, Fluschnik, and Kaczmarczyk 2022; Deltl, Fluschnik,
and Bredereck 2023) and scheduling (Bulteau et al. 2021;
Elkind, Kraiczy, and Teh 2022).

Ranked ballots Under ranked ballots, each agent reports
a ranking over the candidates at each timestep; voting with
ranked ballots has been extensively studied in single-shot
multiwinner elections (Faliszewski et al. 2017), with appli-
cations ranging from parliamentary elections to movie se-
lection (Elkind et al. 2017).

Cardinal ballots Cardinal ballots—where each voter
explicitly speciﬁes the utility they obtain from each
candidate— offer a lot of expressivity, albeit at a higher
cost of elicitation. Such ballots have been studied in set-
tings such as public decision-making (Conitzer, Freeman,
and Shah 2017; Freeman, Zahedi, and Conitzer 2017; Fain,
Munagala, and Shah 2018), portioning (Freeman et al. 2021;

Elkind, Suksompong, and Teh 2023), and line-up elections
(Boehmer et al. 2020).

Temporal Evolution

Next, we consider the temporal evolution of preferences.
Preferences are said to be static if they do not change over
time, and are dynamic otherwise.

Static preferences
In this setting, each voter’s preferences
remain the same across the entire time horizon, and temporal
considerations arise because of candidate availability issues
or constraints on possible outcomes (refer to the Outcomes
section for a discussion). For instance, Bulteau et al. (2021)
consider static preferences in perpetual voting, and obtain
positive algorithmic results for achieving notions of propor-
tionality in this setting.

Dynamic preferences Dynamic preferences capture the
idea that agents’ preferences may evolve with time. Just as
in case of outcomes, we distinguish between non-adaptive
preferences, which evolve due to external considerations
(e.g., when expressing preferences over restaurants for each
day of the week, an agent may prefer a non-meat option on
Fridays), and adaptive preferences, which change based on
decisions that have been made so far (e.g., an agent may
be unwilling to eat at the same restaurant twice in a row).
For instance, the literature on the building of public projects
(Conitzer, Freeman, and Shah 2017; Fain, Munagala, and
Shah 2018; Skowron and G´orecki 2022) and Bulteau et al.
(2021) work on perpetual voting consider dynamic non-
adaptive preferences, whereas Parkes and Procaccia (2013)
consider dynamic adaptive preferences.

Intertemporal constraints An important special case that
is not captured by the static/dynamic dichotomy is intertem-
poral restrictions on voters’ ballots: e.g., in the context of
scheduling, an agent may be asked to report her ideal sched-
ule (Elkind, Kraiczy, and Teh 2022). This means that agents
approve exactly one project per timestep, with no repetition
of projects—this is equivalent to a constraint imposed across
timesteps.

We also note that, at least for approval ballots, simple
candidate availability constraints can be incorporated into
voters’ preferences: e.g., if candidate p is not available at
timestep r, we can simply remove p from all voters’ ballots
at r. By doing so, one can simplify the description of the
input instance. However, this approach is not well-suited to
more complex feasibility constraints or ranked ballots.

Observability

The next element we consider is the observability of future
timesteps. The setting is said to be online if the preferences
of agents at future timesteps are not known in advance, and
ofﬂine otherwise.

Online settings Online scenarios are most prevalent in
the dynamic social choice literature (Freeman, Zahedi, and
Conitzer 2017; Freeman et al. 2018), where candidates are

selected sequentially without information on agents’ prefer-
ences at future timesteps. This is reminiscent of the secre-
tary problem, or, more speciﬁcally, its k-winner variant (Al-
bers and Ladewig 2021); however, the key difference is that
in the standard secretary problem the decision is made by
a single stakeholder. Do et al. (2022) consider a multiple-
stakeholder variant of the k-secretary problem that speciﬁ-
cally addresses the question of whether committees selected
online can proportionally represent voters. A similar model
is explored by Israel and Brill (2021). Another line of work
considers settings where voters rather than candidates are
the ones that appear online (Oren and Lucier 2014; Dey, Tal-
mon, and van Handel 2017). Other related online models in
social choice include those in fair division (see, e.g., the sur-
vey by Aleksandrov and Walsh (2020)).

Ofﬂine settings
In ofﬂine settings, agents’ preferences are
fully known in advance, prior to the computation of the out-
come at each timestep. Several works on fair scheduling
(Elkind, Kraiczy, and Teh 2022; Patro et al. 2022) consider
an ofﬂine model where preferences are fully available at the
onset, and the goal is to study the computational problems
associated with ﬁnding a desirable outcome or to conduct an
axiomatic analysis of the mechanisms for obtaining an out-
come. Ofﬂine models usually admit better solutions than on-
line models; this is the case in, e.g., temporal fair allocation
settings (Bampis, Escofﬁer, and Mladenovic 2018; Igarashi
et al. 2023).

Sequentiality
Another element of our framework is sequentiality of the
problem instance. This emphasizes the importance of or-
der over the timesteps. The order matters when agents’
have adaptive preferences (refer to the discussion of dy-
namic preferences in the Temporal Evolution subsection un-
der Preferences), or where the contiguity of timesteps is
important, as well as in online settings. For instance, in
the context of AAAI executive council elections, a candi-
date agrees to serve on the council for three consecutive
timesteps (and cannot participate immediately after com-
pleting their term); contiguity also matters for sequential
committee elections (Bredereck, Kaczmarczyk, and Nieder-
meier 2020; Bredereck, Fluschnik, and Kaczmarczyk 2022;
Deltl, Fluschnik, and Bredereck 2023). In contrast, in the
scheduling model of Elkind, Kraiczy, and Teh (2022) or Bul-
teau et al. (2021), timeslots can be rearranged arbitrarily,
i.e., this model is fundamentally non-sequential. While non-
sequential settings have interesting computational problems
in their own right (Boehmer and Niedermeier 2021), sequen-
tial settings pose additional challenges.

Solution Concepts
The ﬁnal element of our framework is the deﬁnition of suit-
able (temporal) solution concepts. For instance, one could
consider the temporal extensions of popular fairness notions
such as proportionality (Freeman et al. 2018), equitability
(Elkind, Kraiczy, and Teh 2022), or justiﬁed representation
(Bulteau et al. 2021; Chandak, Goel, and Peters 2023). One
may also wish to use time as a tool for allowing agents to be

represented eventually (global), consistently (local), or pe-
riodically (frequency-based). We classify these approaches
into three (non-exhaustive) broad categories.

Global solution concepts Global solution concepts eval-
uate agents’ welfare across the entire time horizon. This
means emphasizing the eventual outcome with respect to the
welfare goal, even if it means that within certain timesteps
the treatment of agents can be highly unequal. An example
of this approach is taking a global utilitarian or egalitarian
view (Elkind, Kraiczy, and Teh 2022), or achieving a pre-
deﬁned notion of fairness and welfare in ofﬂine models of
scheduling (Patro et al. 2022).

Local solution concepts Local solution concepts evaluate
agents’ welfare at speciﬁed time intervals. This means em-
phasizing the welfare of agents either at each timestep, or for
each pre-speciﬁed number of timesteps. For instance, in the
perpetual voting model (Lackner 2020), decisions are made
at each round, and welfare properties are considered for each
agent up to and including the current round. In other models,
such as sequential committee elections (Bredereck, Kacz-
marczyk, and Niedermeier 2020; Bredereck, Fluschnik, and
Kaczmarczyk 2022; Deltl, Fluschnik, and Bredereck 2023),
the quality of a committee may be deﬁned and maintained
as a goal at each timestep.

Frequency-based solution concepts Another possibility
is to consider frequency-based properties, which can be for-
mulated in terms of bounds on the number of timesteps (be it
consecutive or not) that have elapsed since the welfare of an
agent was last addressed. For instance, one could mandate
that there should not be κ timesteps that have elapsed such
that an agent has not received a utility of at least γ. This idea
was brieﬂy mentioned by Boehmer and Niedermeier (2021)
in a different, more abstract social choice scenario. Several
other problems arise as well: e.g., one could ask what combi-
nations of γ and κ can be accomplished by a speciﬁc voting
rule (in the worst case, or on a speciﬁc instance), or by all
rules satisfying a given set of axioms; one could also ask
what is the minimum attainable γ for some ﬁxed κ.

Research Directions/Challenges
We have suggested several dimensions according to which
temporal multiwinner voting scenarios can be classiﬁed.
Some of the “points” in the resulting multidimensional space
have been considered already, but others remain unexplored
and present opportunities for future work. On top of that, we
will now highlight several interesting and challenging, yet
fundamental directions for this ﬁeld moving forward.

Formalism of Solution Concepts and Goals The study
of fairness across time opens up opportunities for formulat-
ing novel solution concepts, either ones that are speciﬁc to
the temporal setting, or generalized (temporal) variants of
concepts developed for the traditional multiwinner election
model. For instance, popular concepts of representation in
the multiwinner election setting (e.g., justiﬁed representa-
tion and its variants (Aziz et al. 2017; S´anchez-Fern´andez
et al. 2017; Peters, Pierczy´nski, and Skowron 2021)) can be

extended (Bulteau et al. (2021) and Chandak, Goel, and Pe-
ters (2023) made ﬁrst steps in this direction) and the associ-
ated computational problems can be studied. Other welfare
goals in multiwinner elections such as diversity (Bredereck
et al. 2018; Relia 2022) can similarly be explored. Another
direction that one could pursue would be considering a gen-
eralization of existing multiwinner voting rules to the tempo-
ral setting (this line of work was initiated by Lackner (2020)
and Lackner and Maly (2023)), and investigating whether
these rules satisfy the corresponding generalized temporal
axioms (e.g., representation as discussed above).

The Temporal Dimension In the multiwinner voting lit-
erature, it is common to consider structural constraints on
voters’ preferences, as a means to circumvent impossibil-
ity and computational hardness results (Betzler, Slinko, and
Uhlmann 2013; Elkind and Lackner 2015). The temporal
setting may beneﬁt from this approach, too. In particular, it
may be of interest to investigate the impact of structural con-
straints that are speciﬁc to the temporal setting. For instance,
when considering evolving preferences, one can place addi-
tional restrictions on how agents’ preferences may change
over time: e.g., perhaps agents’ approval sets can only ex-
pand (as they learn about beneﬁts of projects they were pre-
viously not aware of), or, alternatively, the preferences can-
not change too drastically between two consecutive time pe-
riods; similarly, the set of available candidates may evolve
in a predictable manner, i.e., perhaps each candidate is only
present for a number of consecutive steps. Such constraints
on candidates’ availabilities and agents’ temporal prefer-
ences can be viewed as a novel structured preference do-
main (Elkind, Lackner, and Peters 2022), and can therefore
offer a pathway towards positive algorithmic and axiomatic
results.

Furthermore, we can consider settings where agents as-
sign different importance to different timesteps (on top of
preferences over candidates): e.g., in case of public projects,
an agent may plan to be overseas during a speciﬁc time pe-
riod and is therefore less interested in projects implemented
during that period. Allowing more expressive ballots will al-
low solutions that provide better welfare guarantees, but is
likely to introduce a whole new set of computational chal-
lenges that must be dealt with.

Moreover, it is interesting to explore extensions of nor-
mative analysis into the temporal realm. One could con-
sider fairness criteria evaluated according to the worst-case,
average-case or best-case with respect to timesteps, pos-
sibly with a discount factor. More broadly, when deﬁn-
ing temporal extensions of notions of representation, rather
than considering a simple additive variant across timesteps,
one could deﬁne novel concepts that take into account the
timesteps themselves in the deﬁnition.

Does Time Hurt or Heal? Another important question is
to understand the effect of time in comparison to traditional
single-shot multiwinner election models. Apart from the im-
pact (positive or negative) that it can have on agents’ welfare
(as discussed in previous sections), one can approach this
question from a computational perspective: does time make
computing certain solution concepts easier (i.e., more algo-

rithmically efﬁcient), or does it add a computational hurdle?
For instance, in single-shot elections, the property of pro-
portional justiﬁed representation (S´anchez-Fern´andez et al.
2017) can only be accomplished by fairly sophisticated algo-
rithms (Brill et al. 2017), whereas in perpetual voting with
static preferences it is provided by a simple greedy algo-
rithm (Bulteau et al. 2021). It would be interesting to explore
whether similar results can be obtained for other proportion-
ality and fairness concepts.

Beyond Multiwinner Voting: Participatory Budgeting
Throughout the paper, we focused on the setting where the
number of candidates to be selected is speciﬁed as part of the
input. One can also consider a more general setting of par-
ticipatory budgeting, where candidates (projects) may have
distinct costs, and there is a budget, so that the total cost of
the selected projects must remain within the budget (Aziz
and Shah 2021). While some of the work we discussed con-
siders this more expressive setting (Lackner, Maly, and Rey
2021), most of the literature focuses exclusively on the basic
multiwinner scenario; it would be interesting to see to what
extent the existing positive results carry over to the richer
participatory budgeting domain.

