Introduction
In recent years, Arctic modeling has become a focus of in-
creased interest for researchers in various scientific fields.
The sea ice melting process, in conjunction with global
warming, determines the ecological state of the region, in-
cluding biodiversity conservation. Ice concentration distri-
bution plays a key role in laying tracks by icebreakers and
advancing cargo and research ships.

Predictive modeling of ice conditions in the Arctic is con-
sidered in different time scales. Short-term forecasts involve
the assimilation of operational information and reproducing
accurate data for decision-making. This type of forecasting
is limited to intervals from several hours to several months.
Long-term forecasting is carried out one or several seasons
in advance to enable advance planning, which is essential in
the industrial sector (Harsem et al. 2015). In predicting the
timing of opening and freezing of the water area, statistical
modeling is carried out based on retrospective observational
data (Wu et al. 2023).

Physical modeling became the classical approach to the
simulation of natural environments because of advantages
on the spatial and temporal scales and the ability to predict
and analyze different scenarios (Chen et al. 2023). It utilizes
complex numerical methods to solve the equations of mo-
tion, thermodynamics, and radiation (Stroeve et al. 2007).

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Despite the robustness and explainability of physical mod-
eling, its application is often complicated by high computa-
tional cost, the need for boundary and initial conditions for
many variables, and complex parameterization for a specific
territory. Years of active development of earth remote sens-
ing have contributed to the accumulation of spatiotemporal
datasets for environmental systems, which can be used to
train various data-driven models, including deep neural net-
works. While deep learning models can provide high-quality
environmental forecasts (Lam et al. 2023), the computa-
tional cost for models’ training to satisfy the task-specific
requirements (water area, time and spatial resolution, fore-
cast length, objective function) can be excessive. For this
reason, we aimed to provide a more lightweight surrogate
alternative to existing solutions for sea ice forecasting.

This paper presents a deep learning approach LANE-SI
that uses an ensemble of convolutional neural networks
(CNN) for long-term predictive modeling of sea ice concen-
tration. Satellite data with post-correction - OSI SAF Global
Sea Ice Concentration (SSMIS) product (Tonboe et al. 2016)
was taken as training data. Results are presented for the Kara
Sea and part of the Barents Sea region of the Arctic. The de-
veloped model is lightweight due to its simple architecture
and is also undemanding in input data - only the pre-history
of the target parameter is required. A comparison was made
with the ECMWF’s fifth-generation physics-based seasonal
forecast system - SEAS5 (Johnson et al. 2019). The compar-
ison results demonstrate that the surrogate model reproduces
the absolute values of ice concentration and their spatial dis-
tribution with a quality comparable to the SEAS5 forecast.
The surrogate model reproduces the position of the ice edge
better than the SEAS5 forecast, both on average contour
points position and the position of each point separately.

The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 reviews the
key related work, Section 3 describes the proposed method
for the design of surrogate sea ice forecasting models named
LANE-SI, Section 4 contains the experimental results, and
Section 5 presents concluding remarks for the proposed
methods.

Related Work
The classic method for modeling sea ice parameters is nu-
merical modeling based on systems of differential equa-
tions. Over the years of technological development, a large

 
 
 
 
 
 
number of both specific solutions that reproduce local ice
dynamics (Girard et al. 2011) and general methods of nu-
merical hydrometeorological forecasting (Wang, Chen, and
Kumar 2013; Zhang and Rothrock 2003) have been devel-
oped. State-of-the-art physical models like NEMO-SEAICE
(Madec et al. 2017) make it possible to reproduce ice con-
ditions both at the global (Hvatov et al. 2019) and regional
(Pemberton et al. 2017) levels. Considering the universality
of numerical models, it should be noted that their adapta-
tion to a specific territory requires significant effort from a
subject specialist and considerable computing resources, as
well as setting boundary and initial conditions, which raises
the need for high-quality initial data, which is not always
available for the water area interest.

There has been a rapid development of data-driven ap-
proaches in recent years. Model complexity varies from lin-
ear relationship searches (Kapsch et al. 2014) and regression
models (Ahn et al. 2014) to deep learning networks (Chi and
Kim 2017). Regression models are limited in their applica-
bility due to the enormously increasing complexity when
moving to grid calculations. Using neural networks based
on simple convolutional (Kim et al. 2020) and more com-
plex U-Net (Ali and Wang 2022) architectures provide high-
resolution output images and allow a more detailed fore-
cast. However, most high-quality existing solutions require a
large amount of additional input data and computing power
(Andersson et al. 2021; Ali and Wang 2022) for training and
network prediction, significantly limiting their applicability
for specific water areas.

It is known that combining a set of simple models into
ensembles makes it possible to achieve higher quality fore-
casting, including in the subject area of hydrometeorology
(Ali et al. 2021; Kim et al. 2018). We assume that ensem-
bling of simple neural networks can lead us to better quality
at lower computational costs (Zhou, Wu, and Tang 2002).
Thus, the question arises of finding a balance between the
complexity of the model and the quality of the forecast.

LANE-SI

To achieve a better quality of high-resolution long-term sea
ice forecasting in a computationally cheap way, we devel-
oped the LANE-SI approach that allows designing the pre-
dictive model for sea ice in specific water areas. We used
the convolutional neural network for a non-standard task -
time-spatial forecasting. In contrast to LSTM architectures,
which allow the extraction of features only from time series
(Choi, De Silva, and Yamaguchi 2019), convolution empha-
sizes the spatial distribution of the parameter and reduces
the risk of stagnation over time. The surrogate model was
implemented to carry out long-term forecasting with a fore-
cast horizon of one year. We aimed to make the model as
flexible as possible to adapt to specific water areas to reduce
the computational cost against neural surrogate models that
cover the entire Arctic region (Andersson et al. 2021).

In LANE-SI, the dataset for training a surrogate data-
driven predictive model for ice concentration is prepared
similarly to the lagged transformation applied to time series.
Previous k steps are used to predict n steps ahead using the

pre-history of sea ice. Each time step is characterized by an
image describing the concentration in each cell.

The surrogate model is represented by an ensemble that
aggregates two CNNs trained with different loss functions
and an inertial forecast - concentration values averaged for
each day of the year over the previous five years.

CNN for sea ice forecasting
The basic structure of the deep neural networks used in
LANE-SI include five convolution layers with ReLU acti-
vation functions (Agarap 2018). Postprocessing with cutting
to the range was used due to the inconsistency of using the
sigmoid activation function to ensure that the output image
values range from 0 to 1 (Wang, Scott, and Clausi 2017).
The structural scheme of CNN is presented in Figure 1. The
specific size of layers is configured in an automated way.

Figure 1: Architecture of deep model for sea ice concentra-
tion forecasting. The specific values of layer shape are de-
scribed for the experimental domain (125x125) used in Sec-
tion .

In the modeling of spatiotemporal data, it is important not
only to reproduce the absolute values but also to measure the
proximity of the spatial distribution of values to the distribu-
tion in the target image. Therefore, CNNs were trained on
two loss functions:

• Mean Absolute Error (MAE, L1Loss) - represents the
closeness of the absolute values of each pixel of each pre-
diction element with the target image;

• Structural Similarity Index (SSIM) - represents the
similarity local patterns of pixel intensities (Wang et al.
2004) and shows similarity in the spatial distribution of
the parameter at predicted and target images.

The CNN accepts multi-channel

images with several
years of ice concentration pre-history.At the output, the

54х5427х2754х54Input: multi-channel image, prehistory of parameter –n time stepsOutput: multi-channel image,forecast of parameter –k time steps aheadCNN provides images of the same spatial resolution as the
input ones, but the number of channels is 52. It corresponds
to a one-year forecast with a time sampling of seven days.

Neural ensembling of forecasts

The multi-model ensemble was used to improve the quality
of the surrogate model in LANE-SI. The first CNN reflects
the spatial distribution of the parameter (SSIM), and the
second reproduces the parameter’s absolute values (MAE).
Also, a naive forecast in the form of repeating the average
values for five years for each day of the year was added to re-
produce long-term dynamics not represented in pre-history.
Three types of ensembling methods were tested by quality

comparison with the same metrics (MAE, SSIM):

• Simple weighted ensemble, based on linear regression:
each pixel in a predicted multi-channel image is consid-
ered an independent variable. Predicted values for each
pixel of three separated models are summed with coeffi-
cients that provide less error on the delayed part of train
data;

• CNN trained with MAE loss function uniting the ele-
ments of the ensemble in the form of multi-channel im-
ages into one prediction;

• CNN trained with SSIM loss function unites the ensem-
ble’s elements in the form of multi-channel images into
one prediction.

The general scheme for an approach that combines sin-
gle models into using neural ensembling is presented in Fig-
ure 2.

Experiments and Results

Dataset

We use OSI SAF Global Sea Ice Concentration (SSMIS)
product as training data for sea ice concentration forecasting
in specific water areas. The time resolution of the product
is one day; however, for the problem of long-term forecast-
ing, such discretization is redundant, and therefore the time
resolution was sparsed to weekly. Data were normalized to
a regular grid with a spatial resolution of 14 km using bi-
linear interpolation. An area with the Kara Sea and part of
the Barents Sea was chosen as a test domain (as presented in
Figure 3).

We conduct the experimental evaluation of LANE-SI for
the Kara Sea using SSMIS for 1996 to 2022 years. Primary
forecasting models were trained on the data time range from
1996 to 2009. The ensembling model was trained on predic-
tions of single models from 2010 to 2015. They were ad-
ditionally re-trained on the entire training set from 1996 to
2015 to obtain better forecasts using single models. Valida-
tion was made as an out-of-sample one-year-ahead forecast
for 2006-2022 compared with naive forecast and actual data.
The training time for LANI-SI in the described setting on
a local machine with an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4080 video
card and an AMD Ryzen 9 5950X processor (16 x 3.4 GHz)
was approximately 450 minutes.

LANE-SI against separate data-driven models

The quality of the surrogate model (design with LANE-SI)
for the Kara Sea was analyzed compared to the naive fore-
cast for both the final ensemble model and individual en-
semble components. Table 1 presents numerical estimates
of metrics averaged over the years.

As the table shows,

the surrogate ensemble model
achieves a higher forecast quality than single models accord-
ing to the SSIM metric for all years and almost all years ac-
cording to the MAE metric.

Figure 4 presents an example of a spatial comparison of
different data-driven forecasts (LANE-SI-designed ensemble
and separate neural models) with actual data for a single
forecast step.

This example shows the shortcomings of single models.
The CNN with the L1 loss function reproduces the ice field
with large granularity despite its good fit into the absolute
values on average over the image. CNN with SSIM loss
function and naive forecast tends to over-smooth the im-
age and underestimate the absolute values of the parame-
ter. Thus, the ensemble model combines single models while
avoiding their inherent disadvantages.

LANE-SI against physics-based forecast

To objectively assess the quality of the surrogate model, it
was compared with the state-of-the-art (SOTA) model based
on differentiation equations - the predictive model SEAS5.
The maximum forecast horizon of the SEAS5 model is
nine months (against 12 months for the design surrogate
model). Therefore, we configured both forecasts to start on
January 1 of each year. The error was calculated on average
for each season (three months) out of three fully predicted.
Table 2 presents the comparison results for the entire

SEAS5’s available archives (2020-2022).

As the table shows, forecasting using a surrogate model
designed by LANE-SI is comparable in quality to the
physics-based forecast and, in some cases, can even surpass
it due to the better adaptation to specific water areas.

In addition to the metrics used for training (SSIM, MAE),
a metric for comparing the similarity of the ice edge was
used to assess the quality. The ice edge is the contour of the
spatial position of ice with a concentration of more than 0.8.
An expert can choose the threshold for switching to binary
data (it depends on the scenario of the forecast usage). In this
case, the ice edge’s position is represented by a set of points
with coordinates of a fixed length. The distance metric is
calculated as a mean of the signed distance between each
point of one contour and the nearest contour edge of the sec-
ond contour (Brahmbhatt 2013). This metric was introduced
because it is more indicative for assessing the spatial distri-
bution of ice concentration values critical for navigation.

Figure 5 shows an example of the result of edge identifi-

cation as 100 points with the distance metric calculation.

The distance values were displayed as boxplots for each
prediction step to assess the range of agreement between the
ice edge contour points. Figure 6 provides a visualization for
the 2021 ice melt period.

Figure 2: The structure of the proposed ensemble model (first layer - predictive model, second layer - neural ensembling model).

each point is lower for the proposed surrogate model.

