Introduction

Blockchain’s rise in popularity is undeniable; many non-financial applications
have adopted the technology for its increased transparency, security and decen-
tralisation [20]. Supply chain, e-government, energy management, IoT [12,22,3,16]
are among the many systems benefiting from blockchain.

Two main types of blockchain exist, namely, Public and Private [10] with Con-
sortium [15] being a hybrid of the two. From the above, private blockchain sys-
tems lend themselves easier to a dynamic control system. In a private blockchain,
participating nodes, communicate through a peer-to-peer(P2P) network and
hold a personal (local) ledger storing the transactions that take place in the
system. This network is private and only identified users can participate. The
set of individual ledgers can be viewed as a distributed ledger, denoting the

*Corresponding Author

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

G. Diamantopoulos et al.

global state of the system. A consensus protocol is used to aid in validating
and ordering the transactions and through it, a special set of nodes called block
producers, vote on the order and validity of recent transactions, and arrange
them in blocks. These blocks are then broadcasted to the system, for the rest
of the nodes to update their local ledger accordingly. With the above working
correctly, the nodes of the system vote on the new state of the ledger, and under
the condition of a majority, each local ledger, and thus the global state of the
system, is updated to match the agreed new system state. The above eliminates
the need for a central authority to update the system state and assures complete
transparency.

Despite the potential of Blockchain in many different domains, factors such
as low scalability and high latency have limited the technology’s adoption, es-
pecially in time-critical applications, while in general, blockchain suffers from
the so-called trilemma trade-off that is between decentralisation, scalability, and
security [28].

The most notable factor affecting the performance of the blockchain, ex-
cluding external factors we cannot control such as the system architecture, net-
work, and workload, is the consensus protocol, with system parameters such
as block time, and block interval getting a close second. The trilemma trade-
off in combination with blockchains time-varying workloads makes the creation
of robust, general consensus protocols extremely challenging if not impossible,
creating a need for other solutions [8]. Although no general consensus protocol
exists, existing consensus protocols perform best under specific system condi-
tions [23,5,14,11]. Additionally, blockchain systems support and are influenced
by dynamic changes to the system parameters (including the consensus proto-
col) during runtime. Thus there is a need for dynamic management of blockchain
systems.

Digital Twins and DDDAS have been utilised in autonomic management of
computational infrastructures [17,21,7,2] and the last few years have witnessed
several efforts to bring together Blockchain and Digital Twins. However, efforts
have focused on utilising the former to support the latter; a comprehensive sur-
vey is provided in [24]. Similarly, in the context of DDDAS, Blockchain tech-
nology has been utilised to support different aspects of DDDAS operations and
components [4,26,27].

In our previous work [6], we presented a Digital Twin architecture for the
dynamic management of blockchain systems focusing on the optimisation of the
trilemma trade-off and we demonstrated its use to optimise a blockchain system
for latency. The novel contribution of this work is enriching Digital Twins design
for blockchain-based systems with DDDAS-inspired feedback loop. We explore
how DDDAS feedback loop principles can support the design of info-symbiotic
link connecting the blockchain system with the simulation and analytic environ-
ment to dynamically manage the trilemma. As part of the loop, we contribute to
a control mechanism that uses Reinforcement Learning agent(RL) and combined
with our existing simulation framework. The combination overcomes the limita-

Dynamic Data-Driven Digital Twins for Blockchain Systems

3

tions of just relying on RL while relaxing the computational overhead required
when relying solely on simulation.

The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 discusses the utilisa-
tion of Digital Twins for the management of Blockchain systems and provides an
overview of a Digital Twin framework for this purpose. Section 3 delves into the
DDDAS feedback loop at the core of the Digital Twin and examines its differ-
ent components. As part of the loop, it proposes a novel optimisation approach
based on the combination of an RL and what-if analysis. Section 4 presents a
quantitative analysis of the proposed optimisation approach. Finally, section 5
concludes this paper.

2 Digital Twins for Blockchain Systems

For this paper, we consider a generic permissioned blockchain system illustrated
as ’Physical System’ in Fig. 1 with K nodes denoted as:

M of which are block producers denoted as:

P = {p1, p2, ..., pK}

B = {b1, b2, ..., bM }, B ⊂ P

(1)

(2)

which take part in the Consensus Protocol (CP) and are responsible for pro-
ducing the blocks [6]. Additionally, each node p ∈ P holds a local copy of
the Blockchain(BC) while the block producers b ∈ B also hold a transaction
pool(TP) which stores broadcasted transactions.

2.1 Consensus

In the above-described system, nodes produce transactions, which are broad-
casted to the system, and stored by the block producers in their individual
transaction pools. Each block producer takes turns producing and proposing
blocks in a round-robin fashion. Specifically, when it’s the turn of a block pro-
ducer to produce a new block, it first gathers the oldest transactions in the pool,
verifies them and packs them into a block, signs the block with its private key
and initiates the consensus protocol. The consensus protocol acts as a voting
mechanism for nodes to vote on the new state of the system, the new block in
this case, and as mentioned earlier, is the main factor affecting the performance
of the blockchain. It is pertinent to note that producing blocks in a round robin
fashion is simple to implement albeit inefficient due to "missed cycles" caused
by invalid blocks or offline nodes [1]. Other alternative implementations are pos-
sible, such as having every block producer produce a new block or leaving the
selection up to the digital twin.

Although consensus protocols have been studied for many years, due to their
use in traditional distributed systems for replication, blockchains larger scale,
in combination with the unknown network characteristics of the nodes, make
the vast majority of existing work incompatible. Recent works have focused on

4

G. Diamantopoulos et al.

adapting some of these traditional protocols for the permissioned blockchain,
achieving good performance but so far no one has managed to create a protocol
achieving good performance under every possible system configuration [9]. With
several specialized consensus protocols available, a dynamic control system is a
natural solution for taking advantage of many specialised solutions while avoid-
ing their shortcomings.

The idea of trying to take advantage of many consensus protocols is not new,
similar concepts already exist in the literature, in the form of hybrid consensus
algorithms [13,18] which combine 2 protocols in one to get both benefits of both.
Although fairly successful in achieving their goal of getting the benefits of two
consensus protocols, hybrid algorithms also combine the shortcomings of the
algorithms and are usually lacking in performance or energy consumption. In
contrast, a dynamic control system allows for the exploitation of the benefits of
the algorithms involved, with the cost of additional complexity in the form of
the selection mechanism.

In our previous work [6], we focused on minimizing latency by dynamically
changing between 2 consensus protocols Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance
(PBFT) [5] and BigFoot [23]. PBFT acts as a robust protocol capable of effi-
ciently achieving consensus when byzantine behaviour is detected in the system
while BigFoot is a fast alternative when there are no signs of byzantine behaviour
[23].

To achieve the above, we employed a Digital Twin (DT) coupled with a
Simulation Module to conduct what-if analysis, based on which, an optimiser
would compute the optimal consensus protocol for the next time step. Using a
DT can overcome the shortcomings of relying on an RL agent alone since the
simulation element and what-if analysis allow for the exploration of alternative
future scenarios [25]. The complete architecture can be seen in Fig. 1.

3 The DDDAS Feedback Loop

The system described in the previous section closely follows the DDDAS paradigm,
with the Digital Twin containing the simulation of the physical system, the node
feeding data to the Digital Twin acting as the sensors, and the optimiser updat-
ing the system closing the feedback loop.

Interacting with the blockchain system. Blockchains design, in combina-
tion with the communication protocol for the consensus, allows block producers
to have access to or infer with high accuracy, a large amount of data about the
state of the blockchain system. These block producers can act as the sensors of
the physical system tasked with periodically sending state data to the digital
twin. Specifically, every new transaction and block are timestamped and broad-
casted to the system and thus are easily accessible. Using the list of historical
transactions, we can develop a model of the workload used in the simulation.
Although using queries to request the state of block producers requires a mecha-
nism to overcome the Byzantine node assumption, blocks contain a large amount

Dynamic Data-Driven Digital Twins for Blockchain Systems

5

Fig. 1: Digital Twin Architecture and DDDAS feedback loop

of data which could make the above obsolete. Each new block contains an ex-
tra data field in which the full timestamped history of the consensus process is
stored and can be used to infer the state of the Block producers. Specifically,
through blocks, we can learn the state of block producers (offline/online), based
on whether the node participated in the consensus protocol or not, as well as
develop a model of the block producers and their failure frequency. Additionally,
using the relative response times we can infer a node’s network state, and update
it over time. With all of the above, a fairly accurate simulation of the blockchain
system can be achieved.

Updating the model and controlling the physical system. Relying on
simulation to calculate the optimal system parameters is a computationally ex-
pensive approach [6]. As the optimisation tasks get more complicated, with mul-
tiple views taken into account (figure 1), smart contract simulation, harder to
predict workloads, and especially once the decision-making process gets decen-
tralised and replicated over many block producers, conducting what-if analysis
becomes taxing on the hardware. Depending on the case i.e energy aware sys-
tems or systems relying on low-powered/battery-powered nodes might not be
able to justify such an expensive process or worst case, the cost of optimisation
can start to outweigh the gains.

3.1 Augmenting Reinforcement Learning with Simulation

In this paper, we propose the use of a Reinforcement Learning (RL) agent in
combination with simulation and what-if analysis to overcome the individual
shortcomings of each respective technique. Reinforcement Learning trained on
historical data cannot, on its own, provide a nonlinear extrapolation of future
scenarios, essential in modelling complex systems such as blockchain [19], while

NewTransactionsWorkload StateInformationP2P communication layerBP 1ControlledBPConsensus ProtocolNodesBCTPBCTPApplicationPhysical SystemState of BPNew BlocksState ofComputationalPlatformDDDASFeedback loopOptimiserView: LatencyBPBPBPConsensus ProtocolBPBPBPConsensus ProtocolBPBPBPConsensus ProtocolBPBPBPConsensus Protocol NBlockchainModelBPBPBPConsensus ProtocolBPBPBPConsensus ProtocolBPBPBPConsensus ProtocolBPBPBPConsensus Protocol NBlockchainModelScenario 1 CP 1Blockchain ModelBPBPBPConsensus Protocol 1Scenario 2 CP 1Scenario 3 CP 1Simulation ModuleUpdateDigital TwinBPBPBPConsensus ProtocolBPBPBPConsensus ProtocolBPBPBPConsensus ProtocolBPBPBPConsensus Protocol NBlockchainModelBPBPBPConsensus ProtocolBPBPBPConsensus ProtocolBPBPBPConsensus ProtocolBPBPBPConsensus Protocol NBlockchainModelScenario 1 CP NScenario 2 CP NScenario 3 CP NBlockchain ModelBPBPBPConsensus Protocol NData inScenarioGenerator6

G. Diamantopoulos et al.

simulation can be computationally expensive. By using the simulation module
to augment the training with what-if generated decisions the agent can learn
a more complete model of the system improving the performance of the agent.
Additionally, what-if analysis can be used when the agent encounters previously
unseen scenarios, avoiding the risk of bad decisions.

Fig. 2: General architecture for RL based control

For the optimisation of the trilemma trade-off, views are utilised with each
view specialised in a different aspect of the trilemma [6]. In this case, the DDDAS
component may be viewed as consisting of multiple feedback loops one for each
aspect of optimisation. By splitting the DDDAS into multiple feedback loops,
we can allow for finer control of both the data needed and the frequency of
the updates. Additionally, moving away from a monolithic architecture allows
for a more flexible, and scalable architecture. Specifically, each view consists of
two components: the DDDAS feedback loop and the training data augmentation
loop. The DDDAS feedback loop contains the RL agent which is used to update
the system. The what-if simulation component includes the simulation module
(or simulator) and the Scenario Generator. The data gathered from the physical
system are used to update the simulation model while the scenario generator
generates what-if scenarios, which are evaluated and used in the training of the
agent. In Fig. 3 a high-level architecture of the proposed system can be seen.

4 Experimental setup and Evaluation

Experimental setup To illustrate the utilisation of RL-based optimisation and
analyse the impact of using simulation to enhance the RL agent, a prototype

ActionbcActionsimAgentStatebcStatebcBlockchainSimulatorDDDAS Feedback loopWhat-if Simulation for Data AugmentationStatesimScenario GeneratorRewardbcView: LatencyView: DecentralizationView: SecurityRewardsimDigital TwinDynamic Data-Driven Digital Twins for Blockchain Systems

7

implementation of the system presented in figure 3 has been developed focusing
on latency optimisation. More specifically we consider the average transaction

(cid:80)TB
i

T imeB −T imeTi

, with TB denoting the number of trans-
latency defined as
actions in the block B, Ti the ith transaction in B and T imeB, T imeTi the time
B and Ti were added to the system, respectively.

TB

Fig. 3: An example instantiation of RL-based control: Latency View

For the experiments, a general permissioned blockchain system like the one
described as "Physical System" in Fig. 1, was used with 5 nodes taking part in
the consensus protocol. Two consensus algorithms were implemented specifically,
PBFT and BigFoot which complement each other as shown in [6]. The scenario
generator created instances of the above blockchain system by randomly gener-
ating values for the following parameters: (a) Transactions Per Second (T P S)
which denotes the number of transactions the nodes generate per second; (b) T
which denotes the size of the transactions; (c) Node State which signifies when
and for how long nodes go offline; and (d) Network State which denotes how
the network state fluctuates over time. Additionally, following our previous ap-
proach, we assume that the system does not change state randomly, but does
so in time intervals of length T I. Finally, the digital twin updates the system in
regular time steps of size T S.

A Q-Learning agent has been used. The state of the system S is defined as
S = (F, NL, NH ) with F being a binary metric denoting whether the system
contains a node which has failed, and NL, NH denoting the state of the network
by represented by the lower and upper bounds of the network speeds in Mbps
rounded to the closest integer. The action space is a choice between the two
consensus protocols and the reward function is simply the average transaction
latency of the optimised T S as measured in the physical system.

Results. For evaluating the performance of the proposed optimiser, the average
transaction latency was used. Specifically, two workloads (WL1, and WL2) were
generated using the scenario generator. WL1 was used for the training of the
agent (Fig. 4a), while WL2 was used to represent the system at a later stage,

Optimiser (RL Agent)AtRewardt-1StatetQ-TableAugmentDDDAS Feedback LoopPhysical BlockchainSystemActiontSimulationModuleScenarioGeneratorDigital TwinTraining Scenarios8

G. Diamantopoulos et al.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 4: Results of the experimental evaluation with (a) showing the training per-
formance of the agent on WL1 (b) the performance of the agent and the agent
+ simulation (denoted as agent+) for WL2

where the state has evolved over time. Two approaches were used for the opti-
misation of WL2: (a) the agent on its own with no help from the simulator and
(b) the agent augmented with simulation in the form of what-if analysis.

Fig. 5: Comparison of the runtimes of simulation-based optimisation and agent
+ simulation

As shown in Fig. 4 the agent achieves good training performance on WL1
managing to outperform both algorithms on their own. In WL2 the agent’s
performance is shown to decrease in comparison to that of the agent augmented
with the simulation (agent+) (Fig. 4b). Additionally, Fig. 5 shows the runtime of
the agent+ as compared to that of the what-if-based optimiser demonstrating the
agent’s efficiency. The increased performance in combination with the reduced
computational overhead of the agent+, greatly increases the potential of the
proposed framework to be used in low-powered / energy-aware systems.

5 Conclusions

Leveraging on our previous work on utilising Digital Twins for dynamically man-
aging the trilemma trade-off in blockchain systems, in this paper we have focused
on the DDDAS feedback loop that links the Digital twin with the blockchain sys-
tem. We have elaborated on the components and challenges to implement the

01020304050102030405060EpisodeAVG. Transaction Latency (S)0102030405001020304050AgentIBFTBigFootAgent+AgentIBFTBigFootAVG. Transaction Latency(S)05101520Simulation (What−if)Agent+ Runtime (S)050100150200Dynamic Data-Driven Digital Twins for Blockchain Systems

9

loop. A key component of the feedback loop is an optimiser and we have pro-
posed a novel optimisation approach for the system. The optimiser combines
Re-enforcement Learning and Simulation to take advantage of the efficiency of
the agent with the accuracy of the simulation. Our experimental results confirm
that the proposed approach not only can successfully increase the performance
of the agent but do so more efficiently, requiring less computational overhead.

Acknowledgements

This research was supported by: Shenzhen Science and Technology Program,
China (No. GJHZ20210705141807022); SUSTech-University of Birmingham Col-
laborative PhD Programme; Guangdong Province Innovative and Entrepreneurial
Team Programme, China (No. 2017ZT07X386); SUSTech Research Institute for
Trustworthy Autonomous Systems, China.

