Raising temperatures,
intensifying ultraviolet radiation, and reducing relative humidity, are expected to increase pest
outbreaks and undermine the efficacy of pest control methods like host-plant resistance, bio-pesticides,
and synthetic pesticides [37, 41].
Pervasive pesticide use in agriculture, despite climate experts’
warnings, adversely affects public health [9] and contributes to the climate crisis.
This impact includes:
i) greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from pesticide production, packaging, and transportation [6], ii)
compromised soil carbon sequestration [48], iii) elevated GHG emissions from soil [27, 18, 42], and
iv) contamination of adjacent soil and water ecosystems, resulting in biodiversity loss [35].
In response,
the European Commission (EC) has taken action for the reduce of all chemical and high-risk pesticides
by 50% by 2030.
Achieving such reductions requires adopting integrated pest management (IPM),
which promotes sustainable agriculture and agroecology.
The authors in [8] condense these principles
∗Equal contribution.
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning: workshop at NeurIPS 2023.
into prevention and suppression, monitoring, decision-making, non-chemical methods, pesticide
selection, reduced pesticide use, anti-resistance strategies, and evaluation.
Data-driven methods have played a crucial role in optimizing pest management decisions.
Some
employ supervised machine learning (e.g., Random Forests, Neural Networks) with satellite Earth
observations (EO) and in-situ data for pest presence prediction [49, 4], some incorporating weather
data [40].
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) are used to capture temporal features from weather
data, effectively handling unobservable counterfactual outcomes [47].
extract fine-scale
IPM information from meteorological data, insect scouting, remote sensing and machine learning
[21].
propose an interpretable machine learning solution for Helicoverpa armigera
presence in cotton fields [30], enhancing IPM decision-making beyond traditional thresholds.
There
is a need for a new class of digital tools that take into account the entire set of IPM principles in
order to truly enhance decision-making.
In this direction, we propose a data analysis framework for
IPM based on causality and explainability.
It consists of short-term actionable advice for in-season
interventions and long-term advice for supporting strategic farm planning (Figure 1).
This way, we will upgrade the monitoring and decision-making IPM principles leading to actionable
advice for direct pest control interventions and assist the selection of practices relevant to other IPM
principles, such as use non-chemical methods and reduce pesticide dosage.
Additionally, the proposed
framework will better inform farmers with respect to the potential impact of practices that, in turn,
will enhance the IPM principle of prevention and suppression, e.g., crop rotation, day of sowing,
and no-tillage.
Furthermore, our framework employs observational causal inference to continuously
assess the aforementioned recommendations and thereby satisfy the IPM principle of evaluation.
3 Approach & Methods
Causal Graph for representing domain knowledge.
We constructed a causal graph (Figure 2),
denoted as G, that represents the underlying causal relationships within the pest-farm ecosystem
for the H. armigera case.
The graph G comprises vertices V , which represent the variables in the
system, and directed edges E, which symbolize the cause-and-effect relationships between these
variables (details about graph building in A.2 of Appendix).
Besides helping us articulate domain
knowledge, the causal graph G will benefit the downstream technical analyses in various ways.
G
P1—prevention and suppressionP2—monitoringP3—decision-makingP4-7 — interventions for pest controlP8—evaluationimpact assessment of recommendationsATE estimation using observational causal inferencetime within seasonPrinciples of Integrated Pest Management (IPM)DATAlong-term adviceheterogeneouseﬀect estimation using CATE short-term adviceexplainable, invariant  pest population forecastcounterfactuals serves as an amalgamation of domain knowledge and a foundational schema that can be leveraged
variably depending on the methodological requirements of the analytical techniques in play.
Our goal is to predict near-future
pest populations (Yt+1) using EO and environmental data (Xt) and weather forecasts (Wt+1) by
learning the function yt+1 = f (xt, wt+1).
We turn to causal learning
[34], grounded in independent causal mechanisms that remain stable despite environmental changes.
To achieve this, we integrate invariant learning with causality, categorizing data into environments
E (e.g., agroclimatic zones).
Invariant Causal Prediction (ICP) [19], DAGs, and Invariant Risk Minimization (IRM)
[5] help select causal features, identify potential relationships, and capture latent causal structures.
Explainability & Counterfactual Reasoning for Short-term Advice.
We define the problem as a
binary classification of pest presence or absence, at the next time step, using EO data (Xt) and weather
forecasts (Wt+1).
EBM’s additive model allows visualization of feature
contributions, enhancing trust.
To bolster trust, we propose generating counterfactual examples as
recommended interventions.
We follow the setup of [29], searching for minimal feature perturbations
in (xt, wt+1) that alter predictions using the same model f .
These counterfactual examples represent
proposed actions for real farm systems, ensuring practicality and feasibility [45, 29].
We provide long-term advice for pest
prevention and suppression by assessing how practices (e.g., crop rotation, balanced fertilization,
sowing dates) affect pest harmfulness and yield indices.
Different agro-environments may yield
varying responses to the same practice.
We estimate the conditional average treatment effect (CATE)
[17] using the potential outcomes framework [33].
CATE quantifies the difference in potential
outcomes (E[Y (T = 1) − Y (T = 0)|X]), controlling for field characteristics that drive heterogeneity.
We employ causal inference techniques
to assess the effectiveness of our pest control recommendations, building on a recent approach
introduced in the context of cotton farming [44].
Adapting this method to pest control interventions,
we turn to difference-in-differences [1].
Our aim is to quantify the average treatment effect of
adhering to our framework’s recommendations (treated units) compared to those who did not (control
units).
Historical intervention data, annotated as recommended or not, will be used for the evaluation.
Causal inference will be conducted on a per-environment basis, ensuring similarity between treatment
and control groups, following the parallel trends assumption [23].
Depending on data volume and
time series length, other methods like synthetic control or panel data may also be considered.
4 Conclusions
Breaking the harmful cycle between pesticides and climate change is essential.
In this direction,
IPM aims to successfully control pests while minimizing the adverse effects of conventional pest
management on human health and the environment.
We propose an AI-driven framework for IPM that
provides short- and long-term advice, promoting sustainable practices and timely control methods.
Finally, our approach ensures effective pest control and enhances trust and transparency.
Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
We express our gratitude to Corteva Agriscience Hellas, particularly to Dr. George Zanakis, the
Marketing & Development Manager, for their invaluable support, trust, and provision of data.
This
research was primarily funded by the "Financing of Charalambos Kontoe’s Research Activities_code
8003" under Special Reseacrh Account of National Observatory of Athens.
Vasileios Sitokonstantinou and Gustau Camps-Valls
work has been supported by the GVA PROMETEO project "Artificial Intelligence for complex
systems: Brain, Earth, Climate, Society" agreement CIPROM/2021/56.
