Long-term forecasting is carried out one or several seasons
in advance to enable advance planning, which is essential in
the industrial sector (Harsem et al.
In predicting the
timing of opening and freezing of the water area, statistical
modeling is carried out based on retrospective observational
data (Wu et al.
Physical modeling became the classical approach to the
simulation of natural environments because of advantages
on the spatial and temporal scales and the ability to predict
and analyze different scenarios (Chen et al.
It utilizes
complex numerical methods to solve the equations of mo-
tion, thermodynamics, and radiation (Stroeve et al.
Years of active development of earth remote sens-
ing have contributed to the accumulation of spatiotemporal
datasets for environmental systems, which can be used to
train various data-driven models, including deep neural net-
works.
2023), the computa-
tional cost for models’ training to satisfy the task-specific
requirements (water area, time and spatial resolution, fore-
cast length, objective function) can be excessive.
For this
reason, we aimed to provide a more lightweight surrogate
alternative to existing solutions for sea ice forecasting.
This paper presents a deep learning approach LANE-SI
that uses an ensemble of convolutional neural networks
(CNN) for long-term predictive modeling of sea ice concen-
tration.
The de-
veloped model is lightweight due to its simple architecture
and is also undemanding in input data - only the pre-history
of the target parameter is required.
The compar-
ison results demonstrate that the surrogate model reproduces
the absolute values of ice concentration and their spatial dis-
tribution with a quality comparable to the SEAS5 forecast.
The surrogate model reproduces the position of the ice edge
better than the SEAS5 forecast, both on average contour
points position and the position of each point separately.
The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 reviews the
key related work, Section 3 describes the proposed method
for the design of surrogate sea ice forecasting models named
LANE-SI, Section 4 contains the experimental results, and
Section 5 presents concluding remarks for the proposed
Related Work
The classic method for modeling sea ice parameters is nu-
merical modeling based on systems of differential equa-
tions.
Over the years of technological development, a large
number of both specific solutions that reproduce local ice
dynamics (Girard et al.
2011) and general methods of nu-
merical hydrometeorological forecasting (Wang, Chen, and
Kumar 2013; Zhang and Rothrock 2003) have been devel-
oped.
Considering the universality
of numerical models, it should be noted that their adapta-
tion to a specific territory requires significant effort from a
subject specialist and considerable computing resources, as
well as setting boundary and initial conditions, which raises
the need for high-quality initial data, which is not always
available for the water area interest.
Regression models are limited in their applica-
bility due to the enormously increasing complexity when
moving to grid calculations.
2020) and more com-
plex U-Net (Ali and Wang 2022) architectures provide high-
resolution output images and allow a more detailed fore-
cast.
It is known that combining a set of simple models into
ensembles makes it possible to achieve higher quality fore-
casting, including in the subject area of hydrometeorology
(Ali et al.
To achieve a better quality of high-resolution long-term sea
ice forecasting in a computationally cheap way, we devel-
oped the LANE-SI approach that allows designing the pre-
dictive model for sea ice in specific water areas.
In contrast to LSTM architectures,
which allow the extraction of features only from time series
(Choi, De Silva, and Yamaguchi 2019), convolution empha-
sizes the spatial distribution of the parameter and reduces
the risk of stagnation over time.
The surrogate model was
implemented to carry out long-term forecasting with a fore-
cast horizon of one year.
We aimed to make the model as
flexible as possible to adapt to specific water areas to reduce
the computational cost against neural surrogate models that
cover the entire Arctic region (Andersson et al.
In LANE-SI, the dataset for training a surrogate data-
driven predictive model for ice concentration is prepared
similarly to the lagged transformation applied to time series.
The surrogate model is represented by an ensemble that
aggregates two CNNs trained with different loss functions
and an inertial forecast - concentration values averaged for
each day of the year over the previous five years.
CNN for sea ice forecasting
The basic structure of the deep neural networks used in
LANE-SI include five convolution layers with ReLU acti-
vation functions (Agarap 2018).
The structural scheme of CNN is presented in Figure 1.
Therefore, CNNs were trained on
two loss functions:
• Mean Absolute Error (MAE, L1Loss) - represents the
closeness of the absolute values of each pixel of each pre-
diction element with the target image;
• Structural Similarity Index (SSIM) - represents the
similarity local patterns of pixel intensities (Wang et al.
2004) and shows similarity in the spatial distribution of
the parameter at predicted and target images.
The CNN accepts multi-channel
images with several
years of ice concentration pre-history.At the output, the
54х5427х2754х54Input: multi-channel image, prehistory of parameter –n time stepsOutput: multi-channel image,forecast of parameter –k time steps aheadCNN provides images of the same spatial resolution as the
input ones, but the number of channels is 52.
It corresponds
to a one-year forecast with a time sampling of seven days.
The first CNN reflects
the spatial distribution of the parameter (SSIM), and the
second reproduces the parameter’s absolute values (MAE).
Also, a naive forecast in the form of repeating the average
values for five years for each day of the year was added to re-
produce long-term dynamics not represented in pre-history.
Predicted values for each
pixel of three separated models are summed with coeffi-
cients that provide less error on the delayed part of train
• CNN trained with MAE loss function uniting the ele-
ments of the ensemble in the form of multi-channel im-
ages into one prediction;
• CNN trained with SSIM loss function unites the ensem-
ble’s elements in the form of multi-channel images into
one prediction.
The general scheme for an approach that combines sin-
gle models into using neural ensembling is presented in Fig-
Experiments and Results
We use OSI SAF Global Sea Ice Concentration (SSMIS)
product as training data for sea ice concentration forecasting
in specific water areas.
The time resolution of the product
is one day; however, for the problem of long-term forecast-
ing, such discretization is redundant, and therefore the time
resolution was sparsed to weekly.
An area with the Kara Sea and part of
the Barents Sea was chosen as a test domain (as presented in
We conduct the experimental evaluation of LANE-SI for
the Kara Sea using SSMIS for 1996 to 2022 years.
The ensembling model was trained on predic-
tions of single models from 2010 to 2015.
They were ad-
ditionally re-trained on the entire training set from 1996 to
2015 to obtain better forecasts using single models.
LANE-SI against separate data-driven models
The quality of the surrogate model (design with LANE-SI)
for the Kara Sea was analyzed compared to the naive fore-
cast for both the final ensemble model and individual en-
semble components.
As the table shows,
the surrogate ensemble model
achieves a higher forecast quality than single models accord-
ing to the SSIM metric for all years and almost all years ac-
cording to the MAE metric.
Figure 4 presents an example of a spatial comparison of
different data-driven forecasts (LANE-SI-designed ensemble
and separate neural models) with actual data for a single
forecast step.
The CNN with the L1 loss function reproduces the ice field
with large granularity despite its good fit into the absolute
values on average over the image.
CNN with SSIM loss
function and naive forecast tends to over-smooth the im-
age and underestimate the absolute values of the parame-
ter.
The maximum forecast horizon of the SEAS5 model is
nine months (against 12 months for the design surrogate
model).
The error was calculated on average
for each season (three months) out of three fully predicted.
As the table shows, forecasting using a surrogate model
designed by LANE-SI is comparable in quality to the
physics-based forecast and, in some cases, can even surpass
it due to the better adaptation to specific water areas.
An expert can choose the threshold for switching to binary
data (it depends on the scenario of the forecast usage).
The distance metric is
calculated as a mean of the signed distance between each
point of one contour and the nearest contour edge of the sec-
ond contour (Brahmbhatt 2013).
Figure 5 shows an example of the result of edge identifi-
cation as 100 points with the distance metric calculation.
Figure 6 provides a visualization for
the 2021 ice melt period.
