Articial Intelligence research encompasses
a broad variety of topics, and it is important that the council
has representatives from all major subelds.
However, existing notions of fairness for
multiwinner voting do not fully capture the complexity of
our setting: it may be the case that a voter is not represented
by any of the candidates elected in the current round, yet
she is satised with the overall composition of the coun-
cil because she is well-represented by some of the council
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Articial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org).
Also, given that the
council is renewed regularly, perhaps a group of voters that
is too small to be assured permanent representation on the
council can be guaranteed a spot every few rounds?
However, such mechanisms may fail to
maintain fairness over time when lotteries are held repeat-
edly over multiple rounds (Fanti et al.
Lackner (2020) and Lackner and Maly
(2023) conduct an axiomatic analysis of perpetual voting
rules (temporal extensions of traditional voting rules) with
respect to fairness across time.
Relatedly, Harrenstein, Lack-
ner, and Lackner (2022) argue that several common sequen-
tial election mechanisms may be detrimental to welfare.
An-
other relevant strand of work is that on conference schedul-
ing (Patro et al.
2020),
where the goal is to output a sequence of non-repeating win-
ners, whilst maintaining fairness to voters across the entire
time horizon.
Sequential committee election models con-
sider settings where an entire committee is elected in each
round, and impose constraints on the extent a committee can
change, whilst ensuring candidates continue to have support
from the electorate (Bredereck, Kaczmarczyk, and Nieder-
meier 2020; Bredereck, Fluschnik, and Kaczmarczyk 2022;
Deltl, Fluschnik, and Bredereck 2023).
Other models in the
social choice literature that include temporal elements in-
clude sequential decision-making (Chandak, Goel, and Pe-
ters 2023; Kahana and Hazon 2023), public decision-making
(Brandt et al.
Research into temporal multiwinner
elections would thus allow us to capture many practical sce-
narios, discover notions of representation that are appropri-
ate for temporal settings, and offer insights into the possibil-
ity of achieving desirable goals by society in a computation-
ally efcient manner.
, oℓ),
which is a sequence of ℓ sets of candidates such that for
every r ∈ [ℓ], the set of candidates or ⊆ P is chosen at
timestep r.
Next, we discuss various elements of the framework, con-
trasting several options within each element, and positioning
the existing work in the computational social choice litera-
ture with respect to these options.
While one can view this variant of the model as a tempo-
ral extension of single-winner elections, the multiwinner in-
terpretation is justied, too, as one can treat the (multi-)set
O = {or : r ∈ [ℓ]} as the winning committee and apply
fairness concepts that originate in multiwinner voting litera-
ture to the entire set O; e.g., Bulteau et al.
This model is considered in numer-
ous existing works, including scheduling problems (Elkind,
Kraiczy, and Teh 2022; Patro et al.
Feasibility Constraints
In the standard multiwinner voting setting, it is typically as-
sumed that there is a parameter k such that every subset of
P of size k is a feasible outcome (we note, however, that
there is also work on single-shot multiwinner voting with
constraints on feasible committees (Yang and Wang 2018)).
The simplest variant of this model is where the set Pr is
given in advance and is independent of committees selected
at steps r′ with r′ 6= r. This model is relevant if changes in
Pr are caused by external constraints in candidate availabil-
ity (i.e., perhaps candidate X does not want to run for the
AAAI executive council this year due to heavy administra-
tive load in their department, but will be happy to serve in the
future).
In the context of public decision-making (Conitzer,
Freeman, and Shah 2017; Fain, Munagala, and Shah 2018;
Skowron and G´orecki 2022), such constraints can be inﬂu-
enced by the suitability of a project being implemented at
a particular timestep due to manpower or geographical con-
straints (Lodi et al.
One can also consider more sophisticated con-
straints, where at most (at least) a certain fraction of the win-
ning committee needs to be replaced at each timestep; this
approach is taken by Bredereck, Kaczmarczyk, and Nieder-
meier (2020) and Bredereck, Fluschnik, and Kaczmarczyk
(2022).
There are other constraints of this form that can be
found in practice, but, to the best of our knowledge, have
not been modeled in the literature: e.g., an AAAI executive
council member, once elected, remains a member of the win-
ning committee for three timesteps, but is then not eligible to
participate in the next election (but can run again later on).
The aspects that need to be considered include
ballot types (e.g., approval, ranked, or cardinal), and if pref-
erences can evolve over time (static or dynamic).
Approval prefer-
ences are relatively easy to elicit and reason about (Kil-
gour 1983; Brams and Fishburn 2005; Aragones, Gilboa,
and Weiss 2011), yet they can capture a wide variety of
scenarios from city budget planning to elections for board
of trustees.
In temporal settings, approval ballots have been
considered in the context of sequential committee elections
(Bredereck, Kaczmarczyk, and Niedermeier 2020; Bred-
ereck, Fluschnik, and Kaczmarczyk 2022; Deltl, Fluschnik,
and Bredereck 2023) and scheduling (Bulteau et al.
2017), with appli-
cations ranging from parliamentary elections to movie se-
lection (Elkind et al.
Just as
in case of outcomes, we distinguish between non-adaptive
preferences, which evolve due to external considerations
(e.g., when expressing preferences over restaurants for each
day of the week, an agent may prefer a non-meat option on
Fridays), and adaptive preferences, which change based on
decisions that have been made so far (e.g., an agent may
be unwilling to eat at the same restaurant twice in a row).
For instance, the literature on the building of public projects
(Conitzer, Freeman, and Shah 2017; Fain, Munagala, and
Shah 2018; Skowron and G´orecki 2022) and Bulteau et al.
Intertemporal constraints An important special case that
is not captured by the static/dynamic dichotomy is intertem-
poral restrictions on voters’ ballots: e.g., in the context of
scheduling, an agent may be asked to report her ideal sched-
ule (Elkind, Kraiczy, and Teh 2022).
This means that agents
approve exactly one project per timestep, with no repetition
of projects—this is equivalent to a constraint imposed across
We also note that, at least for approval ballots, simple
candidate availability constraints can be incorporated into
voters’ preferences: e.g., if candidate p is not available at
timestep r, we can simply remove p from all voters’ ballots
at r. By doing so, one can simplify the description of the
input instance.
Online settings Online scenarios are most prevalent in
the dynamic social choice literature (Freeman, Zahedi, and
Conitzer 2017; Freeman et al.
This is reminiscent of the secre-
tary problem, or, more specically, its k-winner variant (Al-
bers and Ladewig 2021); however, the key difference is that
in the standard secretary problem the decision is made by
a single stakeholder.
Another line of work
considers settings where voters rather than candidates are
the ones that appear online (Oren and Lucier 2014; Dey, Tal-
mon, and van Handel 2017).
Other related online models in
social choice include those in fair division (see, e.g., the sur-
vey by Aleksandrov and Walsh (2020)).
Several works on fair scheduling
(Elkind, Kraiczy, and Teh 2022; Patro et al.
2022) consider
an ofﬂine model where preferences are fully available at the
onset, and the goal is to study the computational problems
associated with nding a desirable outcome or to conduct an
axiomatic analysis of the mechanisms for obtaining an out-
come.
Ofﬂine models usually admit better solutions than on-
line models; this is the case in, e.g., temporal fair allocation
settings (Bampis, Escofer, and Mladenovic 2018; Igarashi
et al.
In contrast, in the
scheduling model of Elkind, Kraiczy, and Teh (2022) or Bul-
teau et al.
(2021), timeslots can be rearranged arbitrarily,
i.e., this model is fundamentally non-sequential.
An example
of this approach is taking a global utilitarian or egalitarian
view (Elkind, Kraiczy, and Teh 2022), or achieving a pre-
dened notion of fairness and welfare in ofﬂine models of
scheduling (Patro et al.
For instance, in the
perpetual voting model (Lackner 2020), decisions are made
at each round, and welfare properties are considered for each
agent up to and including the current round.
In other models,
such as sequential committee elections (Bredereck, Kacz-
marczyk, and Niedermeier 2020; Bredereck, Fluschnik, and
Kaczmarczyk 2022; Deltl, Fluschnik, and Bredereck 2023),
the quality of a committee may be dened and maintained
as a goal at each timestep.
Frequency-based solution concepts Another possibility
is to consider frequency-based properties, which can be for-
mulated in terms of bounds on the number of timesteps (be it
consecutive or not) that have elapsed since the welfare of an
agent was last addressed.
Formalism of Solution Concepts and Goals The study
of fairness across time opens up opportunities for formulat-
ing novel solution concepts, either ones that are specic to
the temporal setting, or generalized (temporal) variants of
concepts developed for the traditional multiwinner election
model.
For instance, popular concepts of representation in
the multiwinner election setting (e.g., justied representa-
tion and its variants (Aziz et al.
(2021) and Chandak, Goel, and Pe-
ters (2023) made rst steps in this direction) and the associ-
ated computational problems can be studied.
Another
direction that one could pursue would be considering a gen-
eralization of existing multiwinner voting rules to the tempo-
ral setting (this line of work was initiated by Lackner (2020)
and Lackner and Maly (2023)), and investigating whether
these rules satisfy the corresponding generalized temporal
axioms (e.g., representation as discussed above).
For instance,
when considering evolving preferences, one can place addi-
tional restrictions on how agents’ preferences may change
over time: e.g., perhaps agents’ approval sets can only ex-
pand (as they learn about benets of projects they were pre-
viously not aware of), or, alternatively, the preferences can-
not change too drastically between two consecutive time pe-
riods; similarly, the set of available candidates may evolve
in a predictable manner, i.e., perhaps each candidate is only
present for a number of consecutive steps.
Such constraints
on candidates’ availabilities and agents’ temporal prefer-
ences can be viewed as a novel structured preference do-
main (Elkind, Lackner, and Peters 2022), and can therefore
offer a pathway towards positive algorithmic and axiomatic
Furthermore, we can consider settings where agents as-
sign different importance to different timesteps (on top of
preferences over candidates): e.g., in case of public projects,
an agent may plan to be overseas during a specic time pe-
riod and is therefore less interested in projects implemented
during that period.
Apart from the im-
pact (positive or negative) that it can have on agents’ welfare
(as discussed in previous sections), one can approach this
question from a computational perspective: does time make
computing certain solution concepts easier (i.e., more algo-
rithmically efcient), or does it add a computational hurdle?
2017), whereas in perpetual voting with
static preferences it is provided by a simple greedy algo-
rithm (Bulteau et al.
One can also consider a more general setting of par-
ticipatory budgeting, where candidates (projects) may have
distinct costs, and there is a budget, so that the total cost of
the selected projects must remain within the budget (Aziz
and Shah 2021).
While some of the work we discussed con-
siders this more expressive setting (Lackner, Maly, and Rey
2021), most of the literature focuses exclusively on the basic
multiwinner scenario; it would be interesting to see to what
extent the existing positive results carry over to the richer
participatory budgeting domain.
